---
title: "Pod Infrastructure"
chapter: false
weight: 714
draft: false
---

## What's in a Pod?

In [Shakespeare's *Romeo and Juliet*](https://shakespeare.folger.edu/downloads/pdf/romeo-and-juliet_PDF_FolgerShakespeare.pdf), Act 2 Scene 2, Juliet declares:
> "What’s in a name? That which we call a rose  
  By any other word would smell as sweet."

And we may duly ask:
> "What's in a namespace? That which we call a pod  
  By any other namespaces would smell as containerish."

## Purpose

The purpose of this lesson is for you to investigate what makes a container a container in Kubernetes, and what makes a pod a pod.

## Namespaces, Containers, and Pods, oh my!

In Kubernetes, we speak of pods. But what are they *really* made of? Are they made of sugar, and spice, and everything nice?

- `Pod` objects are the most basic unit of scheduled compute power in Kubernetes.
- You can implement a microservice or API in a pod.
- You can create multiple containers in a pod. This is for division of labor within that one instance of the pod.
- You can create workloads of multiple pods such as a `DaemonSet`, `ReplicaSet`, or `Deployment`. This horizontal scaling is for redundancy for resilience and high availability, as well as to support load distribution for performance. You would typically put a `Service` in front of the workload to actually distribute the load.

But what are pods made of? 
In the [Linux Namespaces section]({{< ref "014_linux_namespaces" >}}) you hopefully used the Linux commands `unshare` to create new namespaces for processes and `nsenter` to join processes to existing namespaces.
You could review any of the following sections if you want more details on the following types of namespaces:
- [`UTS` (UNIX time sharing) namespaces]({{< ref "014_linux_namespaces#uts-namespaces" >}})
- [`PID` (Process subtree) namespaces]({{< ref "014_linux_namespaces#pid-namespaces" >}}) 
- [`MNT` (filesystem Mount) namespaces]({{< ref "016_run_containers#within-you-without-you" >}})
- [`NET` (Network) namespaces]({{< ref "appendix/732_veth_encore" >}}) - and its prelude on [`VETH Pairs`]({{< ref "appendix/730_veth_pairs" >}})

Now, you can investigate how these different namespaces are combined in Kubernetes to create containers and pods!

{{< step >}}Create a Pod with one container.{{< /step >}}

```bash
cat <<EOF | tee ~/environment/901-demo-solo.yaml | kubectl -n dev apply -f -
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod                    # the object schema Kubernetes uses to validate this manifest
metadata:
  name: demosolo             # a name for your POD
  labels:
    app: demo
    style: solo
    count: "1"
spec:
  containers:                # a pod CAN consist of multiple containers, this one has only one
  - name: demox              # a name for your first CONTAINER
    image: demo:1.0.0        # the tagged image we previously injected using "kind load"
    command:
    - php                    # where to start the container
    args:
    - -S                     # change the server IP + port binding to listen on
    - 127.0.0.1:9081         # use a unique port per container in the pod
EOF
```

{{< output >}}
pod/demosolo created
{{< /output >}}

{{% notice note %}}
You could deploy this `demosolo` Pod via a `Deployment` or `DaemonSet`.
Note that the `labels` have been assigned to make it easy to search for 
and manage multiple pods with the same `app`, `style`, or `count`.
{{% /notice %}}

{{< step >}}Check which node your pod is running on.{{< /step >}}

```bash
kubectl get pods -n dev -o wide
```

{{< output >}}
NAME       READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE   IP           NODE           NOMINATED NODE   READINESS GATES
demosolo   1/1     Running   0          23s   10.244.3.2   kind-worker3   <none>           <none>
{{< /output >}}

{{< step >}}Capture the node name in a shell variable `demonode`:{{< /step >}}

```bash
demonode=$(kubectl get pod demosolo -n dev -o jsonpath={.spec.nodeName})
```

{{< step >}}Get a list of processes running on that node.{{< /step >}}

```bash
docker exec $demonode ps -eo pid,ppid,cmd
```

NOTE: The following example output has been *pruned for clarity*.
{{< output >}}
    PID    PPID CMD
      1       0 /sbin/init
    177       1 /usr/local/bin/containerd
    243       1 /usr/bin/kubelet --bootstrap-kubeconfig=/etc/kubernetes/bootstrap-kubelet.conf --kubeconfig=/etc/kubernetes/kubelet.conf --config=/var/lib/kubelet/config.yaml --container-runtime=remote --container-runtime-endpoint=unix:///run/containerd/containerd.sock --fail-swap-on=false --node-ip=172.18.0.2 --node-labels= --pod-infra-container-image=k8s.gcr.io/pause:3.4.1 --provider-id=kind://docker/kind/kind-worker3 --fail-swap-on=false --cgroup-root=/kubelet
   1034       1 /usr/local/bin/containerd-shim-runc-v2 -namespace k8s.io -id 193ac69907b7e01e56b0345cdea286853e6ab968ca1622baf3610a27e54723d0 -address /run/containerd/containerd.sock
   1056    1034 /pause
   1087    1034 php -S 127.0.0.1:9081
{{< /output >}}

{{% notice note %}}
Your nodes will be running other software such as `journald`.
Your nodes should also be running pods `kube-proxy` and `kindnet`.
Those will follow the same pattern as your pod described below.
{{% /notice %}}

Note your `php` process running `php -S 127.0.0.1:9081` as seen from the node's perspective.

{{< step >}}What is the parent process id (PPID) of your `php` process?{{< /step >}}

The parent of the `php` container in your pod should be a `containerd-shim-runc-v2`.
In the example shown here, that was process id 1034. Your process id will most likely be different.

{{< step >}}Is there another process in the node's perspective with the same parent process id?{{< /step >}}

There should be a `pause` container with the same parent. 
This `pause` container was added by Kubernetes to your pod.
As it has the same parent as your container, you could call it a *sibling* container.

{{% notice note %}}
Kubernetes adds a `pause` container to each pod. Its purpose will be described shortly.
In many management views, the `pause` containers are hidden.
You are now looking beneath the hood.
{{% /notice %}}

How would you check what container image is being used for that `pause` container?

{{< step >}}Connect into that node and query the container runtime interface (CRI) for a list of images.{{< /step >}}

```bash
docker exec $demonode crictl images
```

Example output:
{{< output >}}
IMAGE                                      TAG                  IMAGE ID            SIZE
docker.io/kindest/kindnetd                 v20210326-1e038dc5   6de166512aa22       54MB
docker.io/library/demo                     1.0.0                c2a66561d37c8       426MB
docker.io/rancher/local-path-provisioner   v0.0.14              e422121c9c5f9       13.4MB
k8s.gcr.io/build-image/debian-base         v2.1.0               c7c6c86897b63       21.1MB
k8s.gcr.io/coredns/coredns                 v1.8.0               296a6d5035e2d       12.9MB
k8s.gcr.io/etcd                            3.4.13-0             0369cf4303ffd       86.7MB
k8s.gcr.io/kube-apiserver                  v1.21.1              94ffe308aeff9       127MB
k8s.gcr.io/kube-controller-manager         v1.21.1              96a295389d472       121MB
k8s.gcr.io/kube-proxy                      v1.21.1              0e124fb3c695b       133MB
k8s.gcr.io/kube-scheduler                  v1.21.1              1248d2d503d37       51.9MB
k8s.gcr.io/pause                           3.5                  ed210e3e4a5ba       301kB
{{< /output >}}

## What are little containers made of?

{{< step >}}Get a list of Linux namespaces in this worker node.{{< /step >}}

```bash
docker exec $demonode lsns 
```

Example *trimmed* output.

{{< output >}}
        NS TYPE   NPROCS   PID USER  COMMAND
4026532822 net         2  1056 65535 /pause
4026532898 mnt         1  1056 65535 /pause
4026532899 uts         2  1056 65535 /pause
4026532900 ipc         2  1056 65535 /pause
4026532901 pid         1  1056 65535 /pause
4026532902 mnt         1  1087 root  php -S 127.0.0.1:9081
4026532903 pid         1  1087 root  php -S 127.0.0.1:9081
{{< /output >}}

NOTE: The example output has been *trimmed for clarity* to only include those namespaces used by:
- your `php` container
- your `php` container's sibling `pause` container (i.e. in the same pod)

{{< step >}}Find your `php` process. Which two Linux namespaces is that in?{{< /step >}}

Your `php` process should have been created in two namespaces. 
Note the process id. That should correlate to the output from `ps` you obtained earlier.

{{< step >}}What are the types of those two namespaces?{{< /step >}}

Your `php` process should be in its own distinct `mnt` and `pid` namespaces.

{{% notice note %}}
This node's `kubelet` asked the container runtime (`containerd` and `runc`) to create your process.
Those two namespaces ***are*** the container around your process, which ***make*** it a container.
{{% /notice %}}

What about your `php` container's *sibling*--the `pause` container?

{{< step >}}Find the `pid` and `mnt` namespaces of the `pause` container.{{< /step >}}

Those two namespaces make the pause process a container.

## Peas in a Pod

Your `php` container and its `pause` container sibling are running in the same Kubernetes `pod`.

Like your containers, your pod is created from Linux namespaces as well.

Look at the output from `lsns` above where you listed the namespaces in the one worker node running your pod.

{{< step >}}Find the namespaces with 2 for the the number of processes `NPROCS`.{{< /step >}}

There should be three.

{{< step >}}What are the types of these namespaces?{{< /step >}}

You should have a `net`, a `uts`, and an `ipc` namespace with the same pid as your pod's `pause` container.

{{% notice note %}}
When your node's `kubelet` asked the container runtime (`containerd` and `runc`) to 
create your `php` container and its `pause` sibling container, 
they also created these three additional Linux namespaces around ***both*** containers.
These three namespaces ***form*** the pod around your containers.
{{% /notice %}}

{{< mermaid >}}
graph
subgraph pod[demo Pod]
  subgraph pausecontainer[pause Container]
    pause((PID 1<br>pause))
    pausens{{pid,mnt ns}}
  end
  subgraph phpcontainer[demo Container]
    demo((PID 1<br>php<br>-S 127.0.0.1:9081))
    phpns{{pid,mnt ns}}
  end
  podns{{net,uts,ipc ns}}
end
classDef green fill:#9f6,stroke:#333,stroke-width:4px;
classDef orange fill:#f96,stroke:#333,stroke-width:4px;
classDef blue fill:#69f,stroke:#333,stroke-width:4px;
classDef blue2 fill:#0af,stroke:#333,stroke-width:4px;
classDef cyan fill:#0ff,stroke:#333,stroke-width:4px;
classDef lavender fill:#fcf,stroke:#333,stroke-width:4px;
classDef yellow fill:#ff3,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
classDef yelloworange fill:#fd3,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
class pod yellow;
class phpcontainer,pausecontainer yelloworange;
class demo,pause blue2;
class pausens,phpns,podns lavender;
{{< /mermaid >}}

This means that:
- the containers in your pod share the same IP addresses, TCP and UDP port number space, hostname, and inter-process communications.

## Success

In this lesson, you:
- Created a singleton pod--a pod with one container
- Discovered that your container is not alone--it has a sibling container running the `pause` image
- Revealed and reaffirmed that Kubernetes containers are made of processes in `pid` and `mnt` namespaces
- Revealed that Kubernetes pods are made of containers in shared `net`, `uts`, and `ipc` namespaces
